CONFIGURATION.md, before:

# Dialogia Configuration

This guide lists required and optional environment variables, how proxy mode works, and the
recommended defaults for development versus production.

## Environment Files

Dialogia reads configuration from `.env.local` at runtime. Server-only secrets **must not** be
checked into Git. Client-visible variables must begin with `NEXT_PUBLIC_` to be exposed to the
browser.

For local development create `.env.local` with the proxy defaults:

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_server_key

# Optional integrations
BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY=
NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ROUTE_PREFERENCE_DEFAULT=speed
NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ZDR_ONLY_DEFAULT=false

# Optional access gate
AUTH_COOKIE_SECRET=
ACCESS_CODE_PEPPER=
ACCESS_CODES_HASHED=
```

When `NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY` is `true`, the client never reads `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`. Instead, the
Next.js API routes under `/api/openrouter/*` forward requests using the server key.

## Runtime Flags

- `NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY` — toggles proxy mode. Defaults to `false`. When `true`, all model calls
  use the server-side OpenRouter key.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY` — client-side key (avoid in production). Only read when proxy is
  disabled.
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` — server-side key for OpenRouter. Required when proxy is enabled.
- `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY` — enables the Brave Search tool. Used only on the server.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ZDR_ONLY_DEFAULT` — if `true`, new sessions start with ZDR-only enforcement.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ROUTE_PREFERENCE_DEFAULT` — optional routing hint (`speed` | `cost`).
- `AUTH_COOKIE_SECRET`, `ACCESS_CODE_PEPPER`, `ACCESS_CODES_HASHED` — configure the access gate in
  `middleware.ts` and `app/access` routes.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_BASE_URL` — optional absolute origin when deploying behind a proxy. Used for
  absolute URLs in share/export flows.

## Build and Deployment

- Development: `npm run dev` (loads `.env.local`).
- Production build: `npm run build` → `npm start`. Copy the same env vars to the hosting provider.
- Vercel: store server-only secrets under *Environment Variables* (Production). Do **not** define
  `NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY`; the proxy uses `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`.

## Security Notes

- Keep provider keys (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY`) server-side only. Do not commit
  them or expose via `NEXT_PUBLIC_*`.
- Proxy mode adds CORS-friendly headers (`X-Title`, `HTTP-Referer`) inside
  `src/lib/api/openrouterClient.ts`. Update the client if new headers are required.
- Access gate secrets should be long random hex strings. Regenerate when rotating codes.
- Zero Data Retention (ZDR) lists fetch from OpenRouter. Cache them via the store (see Phase 4 of
  the refactor plan) and update documentation if new flags or endpoints appear.

Commit message:

Refactor agent system, add provider sort, and improve tool handling
Refactors agent system prompt composition into a new module, introduces a ProviderSort enum for model sorting, and normalizes tool call handling with new parser utilities. Updates message and tool types for stricter typing, improves message scrolling logic, and enhances error handling and metrics computation. Adds new selectors for store access, improves test coverage, and updates documentation for provider and tool extension.

CONFIGURATION.md, after:

# Dialogia Configuration

This guide lists required and optional environment variables, how proxy mode works, and the
recommended defaults for development versus production.

## Environment Files

Dialogia reads configuration from `.env.local` at runtime. Server-only secrets **must not** be
checked into Git. Client-visible variables must begin with `NEXT_PUBLIC_` to be exposed to the
browser.

For local development create `.env.local` with the proxy defaults:

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_server_key

# Optional integrations
BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY=
DEEP_RESEARCH_REASONING_ONLY=true
NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ROUTE_PREFERENCE_DEFAULT=speed
NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ZDR_ONLY_DEFAULT=false

# Optional access gate
AUTH_COOKIE_SECRET=
ACCESS_CODE_PEPPER=
ACCESS_CODES_HASHED=
```

When `NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY` is `true`, the client never reads `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`. Instead, the
Next.js API routes under `/api/openrouter/*` forward requests using the server key.

## Runtime Flags

- `NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY` — toggles proxy mode. Defaults to `false`. When `true`, all model calls
  use the server-side OpenRouter key.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY` — client-side key (avoid in production). Only read when proxy is
  disabled.
- `OPENROUTER_API_KEY` — server-side key for OpenRouter. Required when proxy is enabled.
- `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY` — enables the Brave Search tool. Used only on the server.
- `DEEP_RESEARCH_REASONING_ONLY` — defaults to `true`. Forces the DeepResearch agent to pick models
  that advertise reasoning support; set to `false` to allow experimental providers during testing.
  DeepResearch always executes with the server-side `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ZDR_ONLY_DEFAULT` — if `true`, new sessions start with ZDR-only enforcement.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ROUTE_PREFERENCE_DEFAULT` — optional routing hint (`speed` | `cost`).
- `AUTH_COOKIE_SECRET`, `ACCESS_CODE_PEPPER`, `ACCESS_CODES_HASHED` — configure the access gate in
  `middleware.ts` and `app/access` routes.
- `NEXT_PUBLIC_APP_BASE_URL` — optional absolute origin when deploying behind a proxy. Used for
  absolute URLs in share/export flows.

## Build and Deployment

- Development: `npm run dev` (loads `.env.local`).
- Production build: `npm run build` → `npm start`. Copy the same env vars to the hosting provider.
- Vercel: store server-only secrets under *Environment Variables* (Production). Do **not** define
  `NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY`; the proxy uses `OPENROUTER_API_KEY`.

## Security Notes

- Keep provider keys (`OPENROUTER_API_KEY`, `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY`) server-side only. Do not commit
  them or expose via `NEXT_PUBLIC_*`.
- Proxy mode adds CORS-friendly headers (`X-Title`, `HTTP-Referer`) inside
  `src/lib/api/openrouterClient.ts`. Update the client if new headers are required.
- Access gate secrets should be long random hex strings. Regenerate when rotating codes.
- Zero Data Retention (ZDR) lists fetch from OpenRouter. Cache them via the store (see Phase 4 of
  the refactor plan) and update documentation if new flags or endpoints appear.
