README.md, before:

### Dialogia

Dialogia is a local-first chat UI for OpenRouter models.

### Why

- Keep prompts and history in the browser using IndexedDB
- Choose any OpenRouter model without vendor lock-in
- Simple UI with reasoning visibility and basic cost metrics

### Features

- Multi-chat sessions with rename and delete
- Folders with nested structure; drag & drop chat organization
- Model picker with curated and custom model ids
- Streaming responses with time-to-first-token and tokens per second
- Optional reasoning display for thinking models
- Compare drawer: run the same prompt across multiple models with metrics
- Optional Brave web search augmentation for source-grounded answers
- Basic cost estimate when pricing metadata is available
- Local persistence via Dexie (IndexedDB)

### Screenshots

![Front page](assets/frontpage.png)

![Model selection](assets/model-selection.png)

![Settings](assets/settings.png)

### Setup

Create `.env.local` at the project root. Recommended proxy mode (keeps keys on the server):

```
# Route OpenRouter requests through Next.js API routes using a server key
NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_your_server_key_here

# Optional: Brave Search for web augmentation
BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY=brave_your_key_here
```

Alternatively, if you prefer client‑side requests (not recommended), set:

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_your_client_key_here
```

Install dependencies:

```
npm install
```

### Quickstart

Development server:

```
npm run dev
```

Build and start:

```
npm run build
npm start
```

Format and type-check:

```
npm run format
npm run lint:types
```

### Usage

1. Start the dev server
2. Open `http://localhost:3000`
3. Use the model picker in the header to select a model
4. Type in the composer and press Enter to send
5. Open Settings to adjust temperature, top_p, max_tokens, and reasoning options
6. Toggle Brave web search in the composer to ground answers with sources

### Architecture

- Framework: Next.js App Router with React 18
- State: Zustand with local persistence
- Storage: Dexie (IndexedDB)
- UI: lightweight CSS tokens and Tailwind v4 base
- Markdown: react-markdown with Prism, KaTeX, Mermaid

Security notes:

- Prefer server‑side proxy (`NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true`) so API keys stay on the server.
- Avoid storing provider secrets in `NEXT_PUBLIC_*` variables whenever possible.
- The Brave Search integration runs only on the server via `/api/brave` and requires `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY`.

Code tree:

```
dialogia/
  app/
    layout.tsx
    page.tsx
    globals.css
  src/
    components/
      ChatPane.tsx
      ChatSidebar.tsx
      Composer.tsx
      MessageList.tsx
      ModelPicker.tsx
      SettingsDrawer.tsx
      ThemeToggle.tsx
      TopHeader.tsx
      WelcomeHero.tsx
    data/
      presets.ts
    lib/
      crypto.ts
      db.ts
      markdown.tsx
      openrouter.ts
      store.ts
      types.ts
    types/
      prism.d.ts
  styles/
    francesco-bootstrap.css
```

### License

MIT

Commit message:

Add ZDR-only model filtering and routing preferences
Implements privacy-first Zero Data Retention (ZDR) model filtering, enabled by default, with UI controls in Settings. Models and chat completions are now restricted to ZDR providers/models when enabled, with enforcement and user notices. Adds routing preference (speed or cost) for OpenRouter provider selection. Updates curated models, default model, and documentation to reflect these changes.

README.md, after:

### Dialogia

Dialogia is a local-first chat UI for OpenRouter models.

### Why

- Keep prompts and history in the browser using IndexedDB
- Choose any OpenRouter model without vendor lock-in
- Simple UI with reasoning visibility and basic cost metrics

### Features

- Multi-chat sessions with rename and delete
- Folders with nested structure; drag & drop chat organization
- Model picker with curated and custom model ids
- Streaming responses with time-to-first-token and tokens per second
- Optional reasoning display for thinking models
- Compare drawer: run the same prompt across multiple models with metrics
- Optional Brave web search augmentation for source-grounded answers
- Basic cost estimate when pricing metadata is available
- Local persistence via Dexie (IndexedDB)
 - Privacy-first: ZDR-only model filtering (default on)

### Screenshots

![Front page](assets/frontpage.png)

![Model selection](assets/model-selection.png)

![Settings](assets/settings.png)

### Setup

Create `.env.local` at the project root. Recommended proxy mode (keeps keys on the server):

```
# Route OpenRouter requests through Next.js API routes using a server key
NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true
OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_your_server_key_here

# Optional: Brave Search for web augmentation
BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY=brave_your_key_here
```

Alternatively, if you prefer client‑side requests (not recommended), set:

```
NEXT_PUBLIC_OPENROUTER_API_KEY=sk-or-v1_your_client_key_here
```

Install dependencies:

```
npm install
```

### Quickstart

Development server:

```
npm run dev
```

Build and start:

```
npm run build
npm start
```

Format and type-check:

```
npm run format
npm run lint:types
```

### Usage

1. Start the dev server
2. Open `http://localhost:3000`
3. Use the model picker in the header to select a model
4. Type in the composer and press Enter to send
5. Open Settings to adjust temperature, top_p, max_tokens, and reasoning options
6. Toggle Brave web search in the composer to ground answers with sources

### Architecture

- Framework: Next.js App Router with React 18
- State: Zustand with local persistence
- Storage: Dexie (IndexedDB)
- UI: lightweight CSS tokens and Tailwind v4 base
- Markdown: react-markdown with Prism, KaTeX, Mermaid

Security notes:

- Prefer server‑side proxy (`NEXT_PUBLIC_USE_OR_PROXY=true`) so API keys stay on the server.
- Avoid storing provider secrets in `NEXT_PUBLIC_*` variables whenever possible.
- The Brave Search integration runs only on the server via `/api/brave` and requires `BRAVE_SEARCH_API_KEY`.
 - By default, Dialogia limits model discovery to OpenRouter providers that advertise a Zero Data
   Retention (ZDR) policy, fetched from `https://openrouter.ai/api/endpoints/zdr`. You can toggle
   this in Settings → Privacy. To change the default, set `NEXT_PUBLIC_OR_ZDR_ONLY_DEFAULT=false` in
   `.env.local`. Using an API key restricted to ZDR providers also works seamlessly.

Code tree:

```
dialogia/
  app/
    layout.tsx
    page.tsx
    globals.css
  src/
    components/
      ChatPane.tsx
      ChatSidebar.tsx
      Composer.tsx
      MessageList.tsx
      ModelPicker.tsx
      SettingsDrawer.tsx
      ThemeToggle.tsx
      TopHeader.tsx
      WelcomeHero.tsx
    data/
      presets.ts
    lib/
      crypto.ts
      db.ts
      markdown.tsx
      openrouter.ts
      store.ts
      types.ts
    types/
      prism.d.ts
  styles/
    francesco-bootstrap.css
```

### License

MIT
